Coding standard en Coding standard ideal bestanden gemaakt (#291)
nuno-git/druppie-fork: docs/CODING_STANDARDS_IDEAL.md

### Data Flow

One direction only:

```
Repository → Domain Model → Service → API Route
```

Routes call services. Services call repositories. Repositories return domain models.

**Exceptions:**
- External API wrappers (Gitea, Keycloak) may return `dict` or `TypedDict` because the upstream schema is versioned externally. Prefer `TypedDict` over plain `dict`.
- Pure aggregation/group-by queries (analytics dashboards) may return dynamic shapes that are hard to model as flat Pydantic classes. In these cases, define a `TypedDict` or Pydantic model with clearly named fields; avoid raw `dict`.

### Domain Model Naming

Use the **Summary / Detail** pattern:

- `SessionSummary` — for list responses (minimal fields)
- `SessionDetail` — for single-item responses (full fields)

All domain models are exported through `druppie/domain/__init__.py`. Route modules import from `druppie.domain`, never from internal module files directly.

### Code Style

- **Python version**: 3.11
- **Line length**: 100 (both `black` and `ruff`)
- **Formatter**: `black .` (run inside `druppie/`)
- **Linter**: `ruff check .` — rules `E`, `F`, `W`, `I`; ignores `E501`

> - **Type hints**: Mandatory. Functions, method parameters, and return values must be annotated.

Reviewer: No type checker (mypy/pyright) is configured in the project, so "mandatory" is unenforceable today. Let's be honest about this.

```suggestion
- **Type hints**: Required on all public functions, method parameters, and return values. Note: no type checker (mypy/pyright) is configured yet — adoption is tracked in BACKLOG. Once added, type hints become enforceable in CI.
```

4. **`.env` is gitignored** — The template `.env.example` contains placeholders. Never commit a real `.env`.

---

## Frontend Standards (React / Vite)

### Project Structure

```
frontend/
├── src/
│   ├── main.jsx              # Entry point (React.StrictMode)
│   ├── App.jsx               # Root: routing, auth context, layout
│   ├── index.css             # Tailwind + global styles + Prism theme
│   ├── pages/                # Route-level page components
│   │   ├── evaluations/      # Sub-components for Evaluations page
│   │   ├── Chat.jsx
│   │   ├── Dashboard.jsx
│   │   └── ...
│   ├── components/
│   │   ├── chat/             # Chat-specific components
│   │   ├── shared/           # Reusable UI (PageHeader, EmptyState, Skeleton, ...)
│   │   ├── archimate/        # ArchiMate diagram renderers
│   │   ├── NavRail.jsx
│   │   ├── ErrorBoundary.jsx
│   │   └── ...
│   ├── services/
│   │   ├── api.js            # API calls (being refactored into domain modules)
│   │   ├── keycloak.js       # Auth service
│   │   ├── pendingChat.js    # Module-level pending message store
│   │   ├── uploadManager.js  # Module-level upload manager

> │   │   └── *.Api.js          # Domain-split modules (e.g. sessionApi.js, approvalApi.js)

Reviewer: No `*.Api.js` files exist yet — this refactor hasn't started. Better to phrase as target.

```suggestion
│   ├── services/
│   │   ├── api.js            # API calls (monolithic — target: split by domain)
│   │   ├── keycloak.js       # Auth service
│   │   ├── pendingChat.js    # Module-level pending message store
│   │   └── uploadManager.js  # Module-level upload manager
```

│   └── utils/                # Utility helpers
└── tests/e2e/                # Playwright specs
```

### Language & Framework

- **JSX only** — No TypeScript (`.tsx`). The project uses plain JSX (`.jsx`) files.
- **React 18** with functional components and hooks.
- **Build tool**: Vite 5.
- **Routing**: React Router (configured in `App.jsx`).

### Styling

- **Tailwind CSS 3** is the only styling system.
- Custom styles go in `src/index.css` (Tailwind directives + global rules + Prism theme overrides).
- Do NOT create component-level `.css` files, CSS Modules, or styled-components.

### State Management

- **Server state**: React Query (TanStack Query).
- **Client state**: Zustand.
- Do not over-use Context for state that could live in Zustand or React Query.

### API Client Patterns

> - API calls are split by domain into smaller service modules under `src/services/`, e.g. `sessionApi.js`, `approvalApi.js`.

Reviewer: Same issue — the split hasn't started. Let's phrase as target.

```suggestion
- **Target**: split `api.js` by domain into smaller service modules under `src/services/` (e.g. `sessionApi.js`, `approvalApi.js`). This refactor has not started yet — new features should create a new domain module rather than growing `api.js`.
```

| **Returning raw `dict` in evaluation/analytics** | Untyped data allows field drift and runtime crashes. | Define `TypedDict` or Pydantic model with explicit fields. |
| **Passing `**kwargs` through service boundaries** | Hides required parameters from the type checker. | Use explicit named parameters. |
| **Inline `if user.role == "admin":` in service methods** | Auth logic belongs in the route layer via dependencies. | Use `RequireRole(...)` FastAPI dependencies in `api/`. |
| **f-string SQL or raw string concatenation** | SQL injection vulnerability. | Use SQLAlchemy ORM expressions exclusively. |
| **Blocking calls (`requests.get`, `open(...)`) inside `async def`** | Blocks the event loop, degrades throughput. | Use async equivalents (`httpx.AsyncClient`, `aiofiles`). |
| **Leaking MCP connections** | Resource exhaustion and stale state. | Open per session, close in `finally` / context manager. |
| **Dead code in a PR** — unused imports, functions, variables, commented-out blocks | Creates noise, hides intent, increases review cost. | Remove before PR. Use `ruff check .` (rules F401, F811, F841) and review diff. |

> | **Auto-approving deployment/codeChange tools** | Bypasses governance and HITL policy. | Require explicit human approval via approval workflow. |

Reviewer: Add new anti-patterns for this stack + a General SWE Principles section (DRY, KISS, YAGNI, etc. with acronym expansions).

```suggestion
| **Auto-approving deployment/codeChange tools** | Bypasses governance and HITL policy. | Require explicit human approval via approval workflow. |
| **N+1 queries** (loop issuing per-row SQLA queries) | The #1 perf footgun in ORM apps. | Eager-load with `selectinload` / `joinedload`; batch reads. |
| **Broad `except Exception: pass` / returning generic 500** | Swallows bugs; defeats `APIError`+`ErrorCode`. | Catch specific exceptions; raise `APIError` with a code. |
| **Naive `datetime.now()`** | Clock skew / cron bugs. | `datetime.now(timezone.utc)` — always timezone-aware. |
| **Leaking secrets into the Vite bundle** (`VITE_`-prefixed env shipped to client) | Frontend is Vite; real leakage risk. | Only prefix public-safe values with `VITE_`. |
| **Pydantic V1 validators in V2** (`@validator`, `root_validator`, `.dict()`) | `pydantic>=2.5` — deprecation landmines. | Use `@model_validator`, `model_dump()`. |
| **Importing domain models from internal modules** instead of `druppie.domain` | Breaks the export contract. | Import from `druppie.domain`. |
| **Hardcoded role strings** (`if role == "admin"`) | Typos, no autocomplete. | Use a `Role` enum/constant; route-level `RequireRole(...)`. |
| **TOCTOU: check-then-act on DB rows without locking** | Double-spend / double-create races. | `with_for_update()`, unique constraint + `IntegrityError`, or atomic `UPDATE WHERE`. |
| **Writing persistent state to the container filesystem** | Breaks K8s horizontal scaling; lost on pod restart. | Write to a mounted PVC (RWX if >1 replica) or object storage. |
| **Sticky sessions / in-memory session state** | Violates 12-Factor VI; blocks autoscaling. | Externalize session state to DB/Redis. |
| **Logging via `print()` or f-string messages** | Unqueryable; loses structure. | `structlog` event-name-first with key-value context. |

---

## General Software Engineering Principles

One-liners, each a single reviewable pass/fail.

| # | Rule | Review check |
|---|------|--------------|
| SWE-1 | **Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)** — a module/function/class has one reason to change. | If you can describe it with "and," split it. |
| SWE-2 | **Fail Fast** — validate inputs and preconditions at the boundary; raise, don't silently default. | No buried `if x is None: return None` swallowing bad state. Surface errors at the API edge. |
| SWE-3 | **YAGNI ("You Aren't Gonna Need It")** — don't build for a speculative future. | Flag unused params, unused generics, "we might need this later" abstractions. Delete dead code. |
| SWE-4 | **KISS ("Keep It Simple, Stupid")** — the simplest correct solution wins. | Reject cleverness: no needless indirection, no one-liners that need a comment to decode. |
| SWE-5 | **DRY ("Don't Repeat Yourself"), but only for true duplication** — extract when logic + reason-to-change are identical, not when code merely looks similar. | Two similar-looking but independently-evolving blocks should stay separate. Over-abstraction is as harmful as duplication. |
| SWE-6 | **Law of Demeter (principle of least knowledge)** — don't reach through objects (`a.b.c().d`). | Long accessor chains signal leaky abstractions. |
| SWE-7 | **Composition over inheritance** — prefer injected collaborators over deep class hierarchies. | Flag inheritance depth > 2 and base classes that exist only to share helpers. |
| SWE-8 | **Favor immutability** — default to read-only/frozen data; mutate explicitly and locally. | `@dataclass(frozen=True)`, returning new objects instead of mutating inputs. |
| SWE-9 | **Dependency Inversion (the D in SOLID)** — depend on abstractions (`Protocol`), not concrete classes, at module boundaries. | Services should receive a `Protocol`, not a concrete repo. |

### SOLID quick reference
- **S**RP — Single Responsibility (SWE-1)
- **O**CP — Open/Closed: extend via new code, not by editing existing code
- **L**SP — Liskov Substitution: subclasses must be substitutable for their base
- **I**SP — Interface Segregation: don't force clients to depend on unused methods
- **D**IP — Dependency Inversion (SWE-9)
```
